.TH SMITH 1 
.SH NAME
smith \- a Python\-based build system for WSI (Writing Systems Implementation) components 

http://scripts.sil.org/smith 

http://github.com/silnrsi/smith

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smith
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B smith
commands.

.B  For more details please refer to the complete smith manual.
.B The most current smith manual and tutorial are located in /usr/share/doc/python-smith/.



.PP
\fBSmith\fP is a Python\-based framework for building, testing and maintaining WSI (Writing Systems Implementation) components such as fonts and keyboards.
It is based on waf. A smith project contains a wscript file (a python script) with the various parameters at the root of the folder containing the font sources.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
start \- populate your new project folder with templates.
.TP
configure \- configure your project and check all the needed dependencies are available
.TP
build  \- launch the build
.TP
pdfs  \- generate pdfs (proofs for review including test of the smart features)
.TP
clean \- delete generated files
.TP
distclean \- delete generated folders
.TP
zip  \- create a versioned release zip (with Windows line-endings)
.TP
tarball  \- create a versioned release tarball (with Linux line-endings)
.TP
srcdist  \- create a versioned release source tarball 
.TP
release  \- create a versioned release zip and tarball
.TP
exe  \- generate a Windows .exe installer
.TP
test  \- run the project\-specific test suite 
.TP
xtest  \- run the project\-specific rendering test suite 
.TP
alltests  \- run all the project\-specific tests 
.TP
ttfchecks  \- run fontbakery QA tests via SIL profile 
.PP
graide \- generate a graide (GRAphite Integrated Development Environment) project file 
.PP
deb-templates  \- generate Debian/Ubuntu packaging templates 
.TP
ots \- run the OpenType Sanitiser 
.PP
fontlint \- run fontlint checker 
.PP
version \- find out which version of smith your have 
.PP
validate \- run FontValidator
.PP
pyfontaine \- run pyfontaine font coverage tool
.PP
checksums \- generate checksums (SHA512SUMS.txt) for available artefacts in the release folder
.PP
sign \- generate .asc detached signatures for available artefacts in the release folder (needs a GPG key)
.PP
For details of the available options see the complete smith manual.


.SH AUTHOR
.PP
smith was written by Martin Hosken <martin_hosken@sil.org>.
.TP
with contributions from Nicolas Spalinger <nicolas_spalinger@sil.org> and others.
.TP
SIL WSTech \- http://software.sil.org/wstech
SIL International \- http://www.sil.org 
.PP
